The chipmaker, now the most valuable public company in the world, said strong demand for its chips should continue this quarter.
Nvidia, the artificial intelligence chipmaker, was crowned the world’s first $4 trillion public company last month and has become perhaps the most important factor determining the direction of the stock market.
On Wednesday, the Silicon Valley company reported results that showed that spending on A.I. infrastructure remains robust, easing the anxieties of Wall Street and investors around the world.
Concerns over whether tech companies would continue shelling out billions to build A.I. data centers — spending that has helped prop up the economy — had mounted in recent months. But Nvidia’s sales rose 56 percent to $46.74 billion in the three months that ended in July, just topping Wall Street’s expectations. Profit increased more than 59 percent to $26.42 billion.
Revenue in the current quarter is projected to rise 54 percent from a year ago to $54 billion, as tech companies pour money into data centers. The forecast was in line with Wall Street’s prediction for $53.9 billion, but the company said its estimates did not include any sales for China, which would lift its revenue higher.

“The last year, A.I. has made tremendous progress,” Jensen Huang, Nvidia’s chief executive, said during a call with analysts. He said the company’s chips would benefit as spending on A.I. infrastructure increased to $3 trillion to $4 trillion by the end of the decade.
“We’re in the beginning of this build-out,” he said.
Shares of Nvidia fell more than 2 percent in after-hours trading. The decline, even when the company now posts quarterly profits bigger than tech peers like Apple and Meta, spoke to how lofty the expectations are. The company’s board approved a plan to repurchase $60 billion of its stock, signaling its confidence in its prospects.
Nvidia’s results have been closely watched since OpenAI released its ChatGPT chatbot in late 2022, igniting an A.I. boom. The company’s fortunes have soared as tech companies have flocked to buy its chips, which are ideal for powering the development of A.I. Nvidia has grown into the market’s most significant stock, accounting for 7.5 percent of every dollar in the S&P 500, up from 3 percent in December. Its results also influence the values of tech and energy companies with A.I. businesses.
“The question has been: Will the A.I. wave continue or could it meaningfully slow down?” said Melissa Otto, the head of research at S&P Global Visible Alpha. Failing to meet expectations would be “like a grenade on the market,” she said. “It could blow up a lot of things.”
In recent months, demand for Nvidia’s newest chip, the Blackwell, has been especially scrutinized. Sales of the product, released late last year, have accelerated, with the company distributing about 72,000 Blackwell chips a week for an estimated price of $30,000 each.

The chip has contributed to increased spending on data centers by Meta, Google and other cloud computing companies. In July, Meta said it would spend $7 billion more on data centers than planned this year, and Google said it would spend an additional $10 billion.
Yet Nvidia has faced challenges, namely getting caught in the broader U.S.-Chinese power struggle. China is the world’s largest chip market, and Mr. Huang has said Nvidia needs to be there because half of the world’s A.I. developers are Chinese. But it has needed permission from Washington and Beijing to operate there.
In April, the Trump administration blocked Nvidia from selling its H20 chip, which was made specifically for Chinese companies, over concerns the chips could be used to help China’s A.I. industry and military. After Mr. Huang lobbied to reverse that decision, President Trump agreed in August to allow the sales.
China later summoned Mr. Huang to Beijing to discuss its concerns about the security of Nvidia’s chips. It later discouraged Chinese companies from buying the H20.
The negotiations meant Nvidia didn’t record any sales to China in the previous quarter. It also said that it has not assumed it will have any sales in China in the current quarter, even though Chinese customers have begun receiving licenses from the U.S. government to buy Nvidia chips.

During the call with analysts, Ms. Kress said government approval would clear the way for $2 billion to $5 billion in H20 sales in the current quarter. “We’re still waiting on several geopolitical issues going back and forth between the governments and the companies trying to determine their purchases,” she said. But, she added, “there is interest.”
Nvidia’s caution about China disappointed investors, who see the country as critical to driving future sales. Before the company’s financial results, analysts estimated that Nvidia would reap $16 billion in revenue from China this year and projected that sales there could eclipse $56 billion next year, which would be a major boost to the company’s total revenue.
Mr. Huang said Nvidia continued to talk to the Trump administration about the importance of China. He said he wanted to deliver a modified version of the company’s Blackwell chips to China, with reduced performance, and added that was “a real possibility.”
“The China market I’ve estimated to be about $50 billion in opportunity for us this year,” Mr. Huang said during the call with analysts. “You would expect it to grow about 50 percent per year, as the rest of the world’s A.I. market is growing as well.”
Lennart Heim, a tech analyst at RAND Corporation, a think tank, said Chinese companies would most likely buy two of those modified Blackwell chips at a premium price and piece them together to get more performance.

“If this chip gets approved, there would be massive demand,” Mr. Heim said. “It’s significantly better than any chip China can produce, and they would love it.”
